---
layout: post
title: Sorting in Ruby 
---

As promised in my earlier post, I will take a look at the built-in tools for sorting in Ruby, and contrast it to Python where relevant.
This post is heavily inspired by the [Sorting Mini-HOW TO](https://wiki.python.org/moin/HowTo/Sorting/) on the Python wiki.

## Sorting Basics ##
The [Ruby 2.2.2 Core documentation](http://ruby-doc.org/core-2.2.2/) provides us with 5 different sorting methods.
As befits Ruby's purely object-oriented nature, these methods can only be invoked on objects that are instances either of the class `Array` or of some other class which mixes-in the module `Enumerable`.
(To use `Enumerable`, a class should implement `each`; to further use `sort`, it should also implement `<=>`.)

The methods are:

+ [`Array`](http://ruby-doc.org/core-2.2.2/Array.html)
+ + `sort`
+ + `sort!`
+ + `sort_by!`
+ [`Enumerable`](http://ruby-doc.org/core-2.2.2/Enumerable.html)
+ + `sort`
+ + `sort_by`

Two immediate patterns pop out:

+ There seem to be two basic types: `sort` and `sort_by`
+ There are methods with bangs (`sort!`), and methods without bangs (`sort`)

The distinction between the methods with bangs and without bangs is simple:

+ Methods without bangs return a new, sorted object.
+ Methods with bangs return the object, sorted in place.

Note that in every case, the `sort` method returns an object.
This makes it very convenient to chain method calls.

The distinction between `sort` and `sort_by` is more interesting.
But before we dive into the interesting distinction, here's a slightly less interesting distinction:
If you call plain `sort` (with no blocks, etc.) on an enumerable object, it will return a new *enum* whose elements are sorted.
But if you call plain `sort_by` (with no blocks, etc.) on an enumerable, it will return a new enumerator.
And it will not sort the object either!

{% gist 8c7f26c800aa28e8d4ad sort_versus_sort_by.rb %}

([This post](http://www.sitepoint.com/guide-ruby-collections-iii-enumerable-enumerator/) nicely covers the difference between enumerables and enumerators.)

## Key Functions ##
The default `sort` and `sort_by` methods simply sort the members of a sortable collection based on their pre-defined comparison operator `<=>`.
But what if we want to change this?

The answer, as is the case with almost everything in Ruby, is to use a *block*.

Both `sort` and `sort_by` take blocks, but they take different types of blocks in accordance with their own semantics.

### A block for `sort` ###
Since `sort` compares the members of the sortable collection with one another, its block takes two block parameters.
The block must return one of `-1, 0, 1` depending on which of the two values is larger.

For instance, the following code will implement the default `sort` itself (that is, calling `sort` with this block is equivalent to calling `sort` without any block):

{% gist 8c7f26c800aa28e8d4ad sort_default.rb %}

So if you want to implement a descending-order sort, you could do one of the following three things:

{% gist 8c7f26c800aa28e8d4ad sort_descend.rb %}

The comparison here is always performed between two members of the sortable collection on which `sort` is called.

### A block for `sort_by` ###
As for `sort_by`, it implements a Schwartzian transform.
Its block, therefore, only takes a single block parameter, and returns a new value, which becomes the value over which comparisons are performed for sorting.

So one cheeky way to perform a descending sort using `sort_by` would be the following:

{% gist 8c7f26c800aa28e8d4ad sort_by_descend.rb %}

Wait, what is that third technique?
It relies on the fact that `y <=> x` is equivalent to `-x <=> -y` for numbers, so it first maps all the numbers in the array to their negatives, then does a regular ascending sort, and then maps the negatives back to the originals.
Again, this is much too complex for an every-day sort, but it is merely meant to demonstrate the possibilities of working with these methods.

Yet another example, this time to perform a case-insensitive search:

{% gist 8c7f26c800aa28e8d4ad sort_by_ignoring_case.rb %}

## A more complex Schwartzian transform ##
What all this means in practice is that `sort_by` can be called on collections whose elements do not have a `<=>` comparison defined on them.
All you would have to do is invoke a Schwartzian transform on the elements, converting each of them into a value which *can* be compared.

Let us look at another, somewhat contrived, example where `sort` will not really help.
Suppose we have a list of `Proc` objects (this being the Ruby way for handling a list of functions), each of which takes one argument.
We want to sort this list---but how is that possible?
There is no definition of `<=>` comparison for `Proc` objects, which makes it impossible to run `sort` on the list, whether with or without a block.

But suppose we have in our possession some sort of reference object which can be passed as an argument to these objects.
The logical thing to do would be to call each `Proc` object with this reference object, and then sort that new list of values.

This is *exactly* what `sort_by` helps us do!

{% gist 8c7f26c800aa28e8d4ad sort_by_proc.rb %}

## Sort Stability ##
Unlike in Python, the built-in sort function in Ruby is *not* stable: 
There is no guarantee that elements with equal comparison keys will appear in the sorted list in the same order in which they appeared in the unsorted list.

However, as [this Stack Overflow answer shows](http://stackoverflow.com/a/15442966), it is very easy to code by stable versions of `sort` and `sort_by` if that becomes necessary.

The combination of stable sorting and method chaining gives Ruby a great deal of expressive power.


